Name: Fetter et al
Year: 1990

In this paper, the authors reviewed a few methods of detecting nuclear 
fission weaponry of their time. They did not have access to the any 
nuclear weaponry and material, and proceeded to numerically calculate 
the properties of the weapon models they were experimenting upon. For 
this purpose, they considered 4 different models, 2 with Weapons-grade 
Uranium, and the other 2 with Weapons-grade Plutonium. The other factor 
they took into account was the type of tamper used; the material that 
blocks the expansion of the nuclear reaction so that it stays activated 
for longer. They considered, for both, the Depleted Uranium and the 
Tungsten tampers. 

As is stated very early in the paper, the point of the exercise is to 
stretch the boundaries. Of the 4 designs, the Uranium/Tungsten combo 
is virtually undetectable. The group did not believe that it is within 
reason for nuclear weapon states to utilise such a devious combination 
for the fact that the design is much more expensive per bomb than is 
required. The Plutonium/Uranium combo, which is much more detectable, 
is closer to what they would expect. The point of the unreasonably 
difficult U/T combo is to set a meaningful lower bound, and happily, 
I intend to expand upon this later in our report. 

NB: The Uranium bombs considered are 12kg as compared to the 4kg 
Plutonium bombs. This is a huge difference in efficiency and cost. 

Passive Detection

For any fissile weapon, radiation is emitted. The detection process 
relies heavily upon just 2 aspects: neutrons and gamma rays. Of the 
2 aspects, if we are able to get a signal from neutrons, we should. 
One of the best reasons for this choice is the fact that the natural 
background radiation of neutrons is much less than that of gamma rays. 
Another difference between neutrons and photons lies in the fact that, 
while both can be produced at varying energies, the detection of 
neutrons tends to capture them at all energies whereas photons can be 
tuned. That flexibility of tuning allows us to look for specific 
signatures. However, that also means that we have to tune, or else we 
will get nothing. This procedure takes time. 

If the signal from the bomb is strong enough to be detected simply, 
then our problem is small (we will still have to consider cheating). 
If the signal is known to be less than, but still comparable to, the 
background radiation, then there exists this method of waiting for 
the signal counts to accumulate until we can be rather sure that 
there is a source other than background radiation. 

Considering an exposure time of 1 hour, then, the simulations predict 
that gamma ray detectors will be useful at least 15 meters away from 
the bomb if the tamper material is Depleted Uranium. If the fissile 
material is Plutonium, then neutron detection is effective at least 
40 meters away, up to a whopping 110 meters. The devious U/T combo, 
on the other hand, is not detectable even if you put the detector 
right on the surface and wait the whole hour. 

NB: For gamma rays, a thin sheet of lead is all that is required to 
shield the detector from unwanted other background radiation. This 
allows us to be rather sure the offending radiation is from the bomb 
and not elsewhere. Neutrons, on the other hand, require obscene 
amounts of, sadly, low-density material to block. This means that 
verification should be done bomb by bomb, far away from all other 
possible sources of confusion. All these are reversible problems: 
the ease of shielding gamma rays makes it possible to fake and so on. 

NB2: The detection methods and machinery vary widely. Handheld 
detectors up to 10kg were considered, as well as transportable ones 
up to 100kg. The journal the paper was published in happened to carry 
in the same issue a report of a helicopter-mounted version much larger. 

Funny Note: The paper states that radiation shielding to evade 
detection may be absurdly huge, but the warheads themselves can be 
put into shielded box or room during inspection anyway.

To evade passive neutron detection in the Plutonium bombs they 
considered, is possible via purification. However, to reduce the 
concentration of Plutonium-240 in the considered sample would cost 
one to several million dollars per warhead. 

Active detection

To irradiate the bomb to "see" inside, we need to choose a type of 
radiation that is neither lacking nor too penetrative. If it is 
too penetrative, then there might be a lack of contrast in the 
photograph to see anything. If we simply increase the source strength 
to compensate the lack of penetrability, we might endanger both the 
bomb and everyone nearby. 

The type of radiation chosen must also be able to distinguish 
between nuclear material and not. At the time, only neutrons and 
gamma rays can be produced in sufficient quantity by portable 
equipment. Neither alone would be a good discriminant. Neutron 
detectors are incapable of "seeing clearly", and although in 
quite some cases are much better than photons at discerning the 
materials used, neutrons cannot distinguish between some common 
legitimate materials from nuclear materials. Photons, on the 
other hand, distinguish the light materials from the fissile 
well, but are useless once heavy materials are involved. 

Radiography 

If we simply take a picture, then an "airport scan" style machine of 
large sizes can be easily accomodated. The method, however, is 
known to reveal too much information, and would require a verified 
computer program (expensive!) to hide the excess information without 
jeopardising the method itself. The paper notes that, since this 
method needs both sides of the warhead, it may require the warhead 
to be removed from submarines before detection. 

An obvious use of radiography is to discriminate between particular 
types of objects under controlled conditions. Prototype nuclear and 
conventional missiles of the same type will be needed to calibrate 
the system, along with the can of worms. If the decision is to allow 
only passive detection, radiography can be used as spot checks. 

Induced Fission

If we are allowed to, inducing fission is the most secure way to 
detect fissile material (by definition!). Here, again, the main 
characters are neutrons and photons. The paper notes, however, that 
for all the effort, it makes no sense to use photons to induce 
fission due to the overwhelming costs and danger. The costs are 
high because the material used to make the bomb tends to interfere 
with the gamma ray induction. 

However, even using neutrons, the problem is huge. When we induce 
fission, we have a choice of the energy of the neutron to input, and 
whether to look for gamma rays or neutrons. The fission produces 
more gamma rays, but again we are totally swarmed by the background 
radiation. If, instead, we monitor neutrons, we can get useful readings 
from prompt or delayed neutrons. Suppose we want to detect prompt 
neutrons. The sample considered has a resonance near 14MeV where the 
neutrons at that energy range is absorbed over 10 times more than 
weaker neutrons. However, using high energy neutrons means that 
inelastic scattering is possible, and the neutron background radiation 
would spike horrendously. If we use slow neutrons, however, we would 
need a source of neutrons so large and strong that carbon-based life 
is going to be endangered. Delayed neutrons, however, is produced 
at a low rate. 

So, the whole process of inducing fission is roughly only useful for 
the devious combo. Otherwise, the costs are not justifiable, since 
the detection rate is far worse than passive detection. 

Ending Notes: 

The paper includes some costs of machinery that are possibly quite 
useful. 

Meow's Take: 

There are a few directions we can take this. If we are in the know 
of what the nuclear design roughly is, with the materials used 
known, then detection is possible as long as it is not the devious 
combination. 

However, the paper itself talks nothing about the case where a dud 
is faked to be a nuclear bomb. All of the material can be fooled if 
we just add a layer outside that is fissile. All of the verification 
process requires multiple layers of trust that do not seem sensible 
if we consider non-nuclear weapon states that are desperate to make 
just one bomb. Overwhelming costs for many bombs make no sense, but 
an effort that only wants one bomb for negotiation purposes can 
easily put up with the cost. That it is possible means that it will 
be exploited. 